README.md, before:

# Cyusbserial

[Cyusbserial](https://bitbucket.org/mcmayer/cyusbserial/src/master/) is is a [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) wrapper for the [Cypress](http://www.cypress.com) `cyusbserial` library for the USB bridging chips CY7C65211*, *CY7C65213* and *CY7C65215*. The main references are

- the home pages of the three chips [CY7C65211*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65211-usb-serial-single-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd), [CY7C65213](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65213-usb-uart-lp-bridge-controller) and [CY7C65215](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65215-usb-serial-dual-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd),
- the [USB-Serial Software Development Kit](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/software-and-drivers/usb-serial-software-development-kit), and 

- the [USB-Serial Library API Guide](http://www.cypress.com/?docID=45725) Rev 1.0 (registration required)

## The Haskell Wrapper

### Thin wrapper and 'safe' wrapper

`Cyusbserial` has a basic, *thin wrapper* that very closely mirrors the C API. It is located in `System.Cypress.USBSerial`. 

There is also a *'safe' wrapper* with proper error handling that also manages library initialization and orderly opening/closing of handles. It is located in `System.Cypress.USBSerial.Safe`.

### Usage

In most cases you'll want to use the safe wrapper,

```haskell
import System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial
```

This is what is covered here.

#### Example

Let's go through a simple example:

1. Find a device,
2. open it, and then
3. extract library and firmware version and the firmware 'signature' 

(The signature is just a four letter string that is not explained anywhere and seems to have no particular use. Let's have it anyway.)

All functions in `System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial` return the type

```haskell
Either ReturnStatus a
```

The (safe) USB functions have to be sequenced in the `USB` monad and executed with `runUSB`:

```haskell
runUSB :: USB a -> IO (Either ReturnStatus a)
```

so our new funcyion `getBasicInfos` begins with

```haskell
getBasicInfos :: IO (Either ReturnStatus (LibraryVersion, FirmwareVersion, Signature))
getBasicInfos = runUSB $ do
	...
```

First, you have to find the appropriate device in the device tree. The function `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` lets you search the device tree for devices identified by

- vendor ID (`0x04b4`), 
- product ID (`0x0002`, i.e. CY7C65211 in UART mode), 
- device type (`DeviceType'MFG`), and 
- device class (`DeviceClass'Vendor`).

 `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` returns either an error `ReturnStatus` or a non-empty list `[(DeviceID, InterfaceID)]`:

```haskell
devIfaceIds <- try $ findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass 0x04b4 0x0002 DeviceType'MFG DeviceClass'Vendor
let (devID, ifaceID) = head devIfaceIds
```

`System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial` uses the *Error Monad* (a.k.a. *Exception Monad*) from [Control.Monad.Except](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/mtl-2.2.2/docs/Control-Monad-Except.html#t:ExceptT).

The prepended `try` will extract the returned value or abort the whole `do` block with a `Left ReturnStatus`. Since `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` will return ('throw') a `Left ReturnStatus` when nothing is found, or anything else goes wrong,  it is safe to use `head` on the returned list.

With `DeviceID` and `InterfaceID` obtained you can open the device

```haskell
withOpen devID ifaceID $ do
	...
```

`withOpen` has the signature

```haskell
withOpen :: DeviceID -> InterfaceID -> USBWithHandle a -> USB (Either ReturnStatus a) 
```

it works with the `USBWithHandle` monad - all functions that need a device handle act in this monad.

Now you can go ahead and extract all the required information:

```haskell
libVer <- try getLibraryVersion
fwVer <- try getFirmwareVersion
sig <- try getSignature
return (libVer, fwVer, sig)
```

One last thing to do is to fix the return type of `withOpen`. To avoid nested `Either`s you have to prepend a `try`. The final result is

```haskell
getBasicInfos :: IO (Either ReturnStatus (LibraryVersion, FirmwareVersion, Signature))
getBasicInfos = runUSB $ do
    devIfaceIds <- try $ findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass 0x04b4 0x0002 DeviceType'MFG DeviceClass'Vendor
    let (devID, ifaceID) = head devIfaceIds	-- infos is guaranteed to be non-empty
    try $ withOpen devID ifaceID $ do
        libVer <- try getLibraryVersion
        fwVer <- try getFirmwareVersion
        sig <- try getSignature
        return (libVer, fwVer, sig)
```

### Device configuration

#### The safe way: Using the *Configuration Utility*

By default the CY7C6521x chips are configured as UART devices. If you want to use the SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C/SPI/JTAG/PHDC interfaces, or configure the GPIO pins, you have to reconfigure the chip. The safe way to do this is to use Cypress *Configuration Utility* (Windows only). It is part of the [USB-Serial SDK for Windows](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/software-and-drivers/usb-serial-software-development-kit).

#### Using `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash`

The crude and unsafe way to do this (Linux and Mac) is to use the `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash` functions in `System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial.Extras`. These two functions are not part of the original API, instead they are reverse-engineered. These functions are **absolutely not guaranteed to work**, in particular if Cypress does any firmware updates. Be careful with these two functions, you may well brick your chip.

The recommended (i.e. *only*) way to use  `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash` is to configure the chip on Windows with the Configuration Utility, then export the config flash content with `readConfigFlash`, and then program the config flash contents again with `progConfigFlash` whenever necessary. This seems to work. But again: Be careful, or you will brick your chip.

### Windows

Todo

### Experiments

Cypress has a cheap (4$) evaluation board [CY8CKIT-049](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/psoc-4-cy8ckit-049-4xxx-prototyping-kits) for one of their PSoC chips that also has a USB-serial converter with a CY7C65211 that can be broken off.

![CY8KIT49](/Users/mmayer/projects/cyusbserial/docs/pics/CY8CKIT-049-600x224.jpg)

Note that the USB-Serial board has **5V logic levels**. Most devices are not 5V tolerant, and you have to use a logic level converter.

## Cypress' USB Bridging Chips

Cypress has three USB bridging chips: *CY7C65211*, *CY7C65213* and *CY7C65215*. 

The main features are:

- **USB 2.0**-certified, Full-Speed (12 Mbps)
  - Support for communication driver class (CDC), personal health care device class (PHDC), and vendor-specific drivers
  - Battery charger detection (BCD)
- Configurable **UART interface**(s)
  - Data rates up to 3 Mbps
- **GPIO** pins (CY'11: 10x, CY'13: 8x, CY'15: 17x)
- Operating voltage: 1.71 to 5.5 V

The *CY7C65211* and *CY7C65215* also have

- Configurable **SPI interface**
  - Data rate up to 3 MHz for SPI master and 1 MHz for SPI slave
  - Data width: 4 bits to 16 bits
  - Support of Motorola, TI, and National SPI modes
- Configurable **I<sup>2</sup>C interface**
  - Master/slave up to 400 kHz
  - Support of multi-master I<sup>2</sup>C
- JTAG interface: JTAG master for code flashing at 400 kHz

| Device                                                       | Datasheet                                                | Price/$ @1000 | Remarks                                                      |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [*CY7C65211*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65211-usb-serial-single-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/139886/download) | 1.60-1.70     | Single SCB; Cheap breakout board available as part of [CY8CKIT-049](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/psoc-4-cy8ckit-049-4xxx-prototyping-kits) |
| [*CY7C65213*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65213-usb-uart-lp-bridge-controller) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/139881/download) | 1.50-1.60     | One SCB, only UART capable                                   |
| [*CY7C65215*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65215-usb-serial-dual-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/129956/download) | 1.70-1.80     | Two SCBs, more GPIOs                                         |

SCB=**S**erial **C**ommunication **B**lock

#### CY7C65211

| Mode                    | Protocol    | PID    |
| ----------------------- | ----------- | ------ |
| UART                    | CDC         | 0x0002 |
| UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C | Vendor/PHDC | 0x0004 |

#### CY7C65213

| Mode | Protocol    | PID    |
| ---- | ----------- | ------ |
| UART | CDC         | 0x0003 |
| UART | Vendor/PHDC | 0x0006 |

#### CY7C65215

| Mode SCB0               | Protocol SCB0 | Mode SCB1                    | Protocol SCB1 | PID    |
| ----------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------- | ------ |
| UART                    | CDC           | UART                         | CDC           | 0x0005 |
| UART                    | CDC           | UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C/JTAG | Vendor/PHDC   | 0x0007 |
| UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C | Vendor/PHDC   | UART                         | CDC           | 0x0009 |
| UART/SPI/I2C            | Vendor/PHDC   | I2C/JTAG/I2C/JTAG            | Vendor/PHDC   | 0x000A |

## Eval Kits

### CY8CKIT-049 protoyping kit

The CY8CKIT-049 is of interest here because it has a USB-setial module with a CY7C65211 that can be broken off. For more information see [docs/CY8CKIT-049-42xx.md](docs/CY8CKIT-049-42xx.md).

![USB-Serial bridge](docs/pics/USB-Serial-flattened.png)

### CYUSBS234 USB-Serial (Single Channel) Development Kit

The [CYUSBS234](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/cyusbs234-usb-serial-single-channel-development-kit) is an inexpensive (25$) dev kit with which all features of the CY7C65211 chip can be explored.

### Breakout Board by David Freitag

There is also a nice little breakout board PCB by [David Freitag](https://github.com/dvdfreitag) on [github](https://github.com/dvdfreitag/CY7C65211-Breakout).

## `cyusbserial` Internals

See  [Internals.md](docs/Internals.md).

## Licensing

Cypress' licensing information is messy. The exact terms had to be clarified in questions posted on the [Cypress developer community forum](https://community.cypress.com). In a nutshell:

- On Linux and Mac the libraries in the SDK of CyUSBserial are opensource and licensed under the LGPL 2.1 (see [here](https://community.cypress.com/message/153411#153411)). LGPL 2.1 is basically inherited from the `libusb` license terms.
- On Windows the libraries are covered under Cypress' own license agreement that seems to be a LGPL variant, effectively. See [here](https://community.cypress.com/message/169733#169733), in particular §1.3 of the attached `license.txt`.

To keep it simple this `cyusbserial` library carries the LGPL-2.1 license itself.

Commit message:

add sober comments about the quality of Cypress chips

README.md, after:

# Cyusbserial

[Cyusbserial](https://bitbucket.org/mcmayer/cyusbserial/src/master/) is is a [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) wrapper for the [Cypress](http://www.cypress.com) `cyusbserial` library for the USB bridging chips CY7C65211*, *CY7C65213* and *CY7C65215*. The main references are

- the home pages of the three chips [CY7C65211*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65211-usb-serial-single-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd), [CY7C65213](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65213-usb-uart-lp-bridge-controller) and [CY7C65215](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65215-usb-serial-dual-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd),
- the [USB-Serial Software Development Kit](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/software-and-drivers/usb-serial-software-development-kit), and 

- the [USB-Serial Library API Guide](http://www.cypress.com/?docID=45725) Rev 1.0 (registration required)

### Pros and Cons

Unfortunately the **Cypress bridge chips are buggy**, and Cypress [haven't published any errata](https://community.cypress.com/thread/43237), yet.
We therefore advise caution when planning to use this chip. Although Cypress doesn't admit it, the forum discussions indicate that there are several bugs in some of the bridge chips:

- [Erroneous bytes are being read (I2C)](https://community.cypress.com/thread/36996)
- [Long pauses between reads and writes (probably a USB software issue](https://community.cypress.com/message/183563)
- [TXLED and RXLED indicator have no relation to the actual USB transfer](https://community.cypress.com/message/183589)
- [The USB connection hangs sometimes](https://community.cypress.com/message/162098)

The support provided on the forum ["Developer Community 3.0"](https://community.cypress.com/message/162098) is rather bad. Unpleasant questions are ignored, solutions are often worked out behind closed doors. Hence **we do not use Cypress' chips right now**.

### Status and future plans

The wrapper works but is not as polished as it could be. Until Cypress sort out the issues we will stay away from Cypress' chips and 
therefore only invest minimally in maintaining this library.

## The Haskell Wrapper

### Thin wrapper and 'safe' wrapper

`Cyusbserial` has a basic, *thin wrapper* that very closely mirrors the C API. It is located in `System.Cypress.USBSerial`. 

There is also a *'safe' wrapper* with proper error handling that also manages library initialization and orderly opening/closing of handles. It is located in `System.Cypress.USBSerial.Safe`.

### Usage

In most cases you'll want to use the safe wrapper,

```haskell
import System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial
```

This is what is covered here.

#### Example

Let's go through a simple example:

1. Find a device,
2. open it, and then
3. extract library and firmware version and the firmware 'signature' 

(The signature is just a four letter string that is not explained anywhere and seems to have no particular use. Let's have it anyway.)

All functions in `System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial` return the type

```haskell
Either ReturnStatus a
```

The (safe) USB functions have to be sequenced in the `USB` monad and executed with `runUSB`:

```haskell
runUSB :: USB a -> IO (Either ReturnStatus a)
```

so our new funcyion `getBasicInfos` begins with

```haskell
getBasicInfos :: IO (Either ReturnStatus (LibraryVersion, FirmwareVersion, Signature))
getBasicInfos = runUSB $ do
	...
```

First, you have to find the appropriate device in the device tree. The function `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` lets you search the device tree for devices identified by

- vendor ID (`0x04b4`), 
- product ID (`0x0002`, i.e. CY7C65211 in UART mode), 
- device type (`DeviceType'MFG`), and 
- device class (`DeviceClass'Vendor`).

 `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` returns either an error `ReturnStatus` or a non-empty list `[(DeviceID, InterfaceID)]`:

```haskell
devIfaceIds <- try $ findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass 0x04b4 0x0002 DeviceType'MFG DeviceClass'Vendor
let (devID, ifaceID) = head devIfaceIds
```

`System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial` uses the *Error Monad* (a.k.a. *Exception Monad*) from [Control.Monad.Except](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/mtl-2.2.2/docs/Control-Monad-Except.html#t:ExceptT).

The prepended `try` will extract the returned value or abort the whole `do` block with a `Left ReturnStatus`. Since `findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass` will return ('throw') a `Left ReturnStatus` when nothing is found, or anything else goes wrong,  it is safe to use `head` on the returned list.

With `DeviceID` and `InterfaceID` obtained you can open the device

```haskell
withOpen devID ifaceID $ do
	...
```

`withOpen` has the signature

```haskell
withOpen :: DeviceID -> InterfaceID -> USBWithHandle a -> USB (Either ReturnStatus a) 
```

it works with the `USBWithHandle` monad - all functions that need a device handle act in this monad.

Now you can go ahead and extract all the required information:

```haskell
libVer <- try getLibraryVersion
fwVer <- try getFirmwareVersion
sig <- try getSignature
return (libVer, fwVer, sig)
```

One last thing to do is to fix the return type of `withOpen`. To avoid nested `Either`s you have to prepend a `try`. The final result is

```haskell
getBasicInfos :: IO (Either ReturnStatus (LibraryVersion, FirmwareVersion, Signature))
getBasicInfos = runUSB $ do
    devIfaceIds <- try $ findDeviceWithVidPidTypeClass 0x04b4 0x0002 DeviceType'MFG DeviceClass'Vendor
    let (devID, ifaceID) = head devIfaceIds	-- infos is guaranteed to be non-empty
    try $ withOpen devID ifaceID $ do
        libVer <- try getLibraryVersion
        fwVer <- try getFirmwareVersion
        sig <- try getSignature
        return (libVer, fwVer, sig)
```

### Device configuration

#### The safe way: Using the *Configuration Utility*

By default the CY7C6521x chips are configured as UART devices. If you want to use the SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C/SPI/JTAG/PHDC interfaces, or configure the GPIO pins, you have to reconfigure the chip. The safe way to do this is to use Cypress *Configuration Utility* (Windows only). It is part of the [USB-Serial SDK for Windows](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/software-and-drivers/usb-serial-software-development-kit).

#### Using `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash`

The crude and unsafe way to do this (Linux and Mac) is to use the `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash` functions in `System.Cypress.Safe.USBSerial.Extras`. These two functions are not part of the original API, instead they are reverse-engineered. These functions are **absolutely not guaranteed to work**, in particular if Cypress does any firmware updates. Be careful with these two functions, you may well brick your chip.

The recommended (i.e. *only*) way to use  `readConfigFlash` and `progConfigFlash` is to configure the chip on Windows with the Configuration Utility, then export the config flash content with `readConfigFlash`, and then program the config flash contents again with `progConfigFlash` whenever necessary. This seems to work. But again: Be careful, or you will brick your chip.

### Windows

Todo

### Experiments

Cypress has a cheap (4$) evaluation board [CY8CKIT-049](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/psoc-4-cy8ckit-049-4xxx-prototyping-kits) for one of their PSoC chips that also has a USB-serial converter with a CY7C65211 that can be broken off.

![CY8KIT49](/Users/mmayer/projects/cyusbserial/docs/pics/CY8CKIT-049-600x224.jpg)

Note that the USB-Serial board has **5V logic levels**. Most devices are not 5V tolerant, and you have to use a logic level converter.

## Cypress' USB Bridging Chips

Cypress has three USB bridging chips: *CY7C65211*, *CY7C65213* and *CY7C65215*. 

The main features are:

- **USB 2.0**-certified, Full-Speed (12 Mbps)
  - Support for communication driver class (CDC), personal health care device class (PHDC), and vendor-specific drivers
  - Battery charger detection (BCD)
- Configurable **UART interface**(s)
  - Data rates up to 3 Mbps
- **GPIO** pins (CY'11: 10x, CY'13: 8x, CY'15: 17x)
- Operating voltage: 1.71 to 5.5 V

The *CY7C65211* and *CY7C65215* also have

- Configurable **SPI interface**
  - Data rate up to 3 MHz for SPI master and 1 MHz for SPI slave
  - Data width: 4 bits to 16 bits
  - Support of Motorola, TI, and National SPI modes
- Configurable **I<sup>2</sup>C interface**
  - Master/slave up to 400 kHz
  - Support of multi-master I<sup>2</sup>C
- JTAG interface: JTAG master for code flashing at 400 kHz

| Device                                                       | Datasheet                                                | Price/$ @1000 | Remarks                                                      |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [*CY7C65211*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65211-usb-serial-single-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/139886/download) | 1.60-1.70     | Single SCB; Cheap breakout board available as part of [CY8CKIT-049](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/psoc-4-cy8ckit-049-4xxx-prototyping-kits) |
| [*CY7C65213*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65213-usb-uart-lp-bridge-controller) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/139881/download) | 1.50-1.60     | One SCB, only UART capable                                   |
| [*CY7C65215*](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/datasheets/cy7c65215-usb-serial-dual-channel-uarti2cspi-bridge-capsense-and-bcd) | [datasheet](http://www.cypress.com/file/129956/download) | 1.70-1.80     | Two SCBs, more GPIOs                                         |

SCB=**S**erial **C**ommunication **B**lock

#### CY7C65211

| Mode                    | Protocol    | PID    |
| ----------------------- | ----------- | ------ |
| UART                    | CDC         | 0x0002 |
| UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C | Vendor/PHDC | 0x0004 |

#### CY7C65213

| Mode | Protocol    | PID    |
| ---- | ----------- | ------ |
| UART | CDC         | 0x0003 |
| UART | Vendor/PHDC | 0x0006 |

#### CY7C65215

| Mode SCB0               | Protocol SCB0 | Mode SCB1                    | Protocol SCB1 | PID    |
| ----------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------- | ------ |
| UART                    | CDC           | UART                         | CDC           | 0x0005 |
| UART                    | CDC           | UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C/JTAG | Vendor/PHDC   | 0x0007 |
| UART/SPI/I<sup>2</sup>C | Vendor/PHDC   | UART                         | CDC           | 0x0009 |
| UART/SPI/I2C            | Vendor/PHDC   | I2C/JTAG/I2C/JTAG            | Vendor/PHDC   | 0x000A |

## Eval Kits

### CY8CKIT-049 protoyping kit

The CY8CKIT-049 is of interest here because it has a USB-setial module with a CY7C65211 that can be broken off. For more information see [docs/CY8CKIT-049-42xx.md](docs/CY8CKIT-049-42xx.md).

![USB-Serial bridge](docs/pics/USB-Serial-flattened.png)

### CYUSBS234 USB-Serial (Single Channel) Development Kit

The [CYUSBS234](http://www.cypress.com/documentation/development-kitsboards/cyusbs234-usb-serial-single-channel-development-kit) is an inexpensive (25$) dev kit with which all features of the CY7C65211 chip can be explored.

### Breakout Board by David Freitag

There is also a nice little breakout board PCB by [David Freitag](https://github.com/dvdfreitag) on [github](https://github.com/dvdfreitag/CY7C65211-Breakout).

## `cyusbserial` Internals

See  [Internals.md](docs/Internals.md).

## Licensing

Cypress' licensing information is messy. The exact terms had to be clarified in questions posted on the [Cypress developer community forum](https://community.cypress.com). In a nutshell:

- On Linux and Mac the libraries in the SDK of CyUSBserial are opensource and licensed under the LGPL 2.1 (see [here](https://community.cypress.com/message/153411#153411)). LGPL 2.1 is basically inherited from the `libusb` license terms.
- On Windows the libraries are covered under Cypress' own license agreement that seems to be a LGPL variant, effectively. See [here](https://community.cypress.com/message/169733#169733), in particular §1.3 of the attached `license.txt`.

To keep it simple this `cyusbserial` library carries the LGPL-2.1 license itself.
